Did the Earth have rings? Well, it
doesn't have rings at the moment, unless
you count all those satellites that are
up
there. But did it have them in the past?
Well, the giant planets of the solar
system, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune, all shown here, certainly have
rings. You can see Saturn's rings even
with a small telescope. The others are
much more challenging. You either need a
space probe or a very, very powerful
telescope to reveal them because they
are much less
intense. But it turns out that it's not
just giant planets that can have rings.
Even small bodies can. Saturn has a moon
called
Ria. And this has its own ring system.
Shown in the pictures on the right here.
There is the data from when Ria passed
in front of a distant star blocking the
light in what's called an
occultation. And as it did so, this
would have provided the opportunity to
time the event very accurately and
measure the diameter of Ria very
closely. And so it was observed. And
what they spotted was that as the moon
approached the point where it was going
to block the starlight, there were three
flickerings, three little dips in the
graph there where the light was
partially blocked before the main disc
of the planet got in the way and then
afterwards another three. This was the
three distinct rings of material around
rear. And if you compare the graph for
Ria with when another of Saturn's moons,
Tus did the same thing, you got a much
cleaner signal from Teus. In fact, it
also probably shows in the RIA case all
that bouncing on and off might have been
down to RIA having a bit of an
atmosphere, but that's another story. It
certainly has a ring system around
it. Other small solar system bodies also
have rings. We found a number of these
oddball small outer solar system objects
called centaurs that are orbiting around
in the Saturn, Uranus, Neptune region in
long elliptical orbits that cross those
of the giant planets, these unstable
paths.
And there are two of them. Chiron the
first one to be discovered about 100 km
in diameter and Cherklo four times the
size that both seem to have ring systems
around them. So even these tiny little
objects can have rings. The more we
learn, the more fascinating the solar
system becomes.
Well, these rings, they seem to be made
of millions and millions of tiny dirty
snowballs, little tiny specks of dust
and ice, everything up to larger
boulders, perhaps even the size of cars
in some cases, going around their parent
body under the influence of gravity. And
it is the breakup of smaller objects
under the gravity of the primary object
that seems to be responsible for
creating these rings. We saw it with
Schumaca Levy 9 being torn apart by
Jupiter's gravity when it came too close
to the giant planet. The main comet was
shredded and then on the next orbit all
the cometlets that were created crashed
into
Jupiter. Had it been on a more oblique
approach, it might have created a set of
rings around Jupiter. That would have
been interesting, too. But these rings
are temporary. Saturn's rings are only
about 50 million years old. and will
probably only last about another 50.
Gradually, the tidal forces and
collisions within the rings tend
to eliminate the energy and momentum of
the particles in orbit and cause them to
fall inwards. Particularly uh the drag
of the thin gaseous atmosphere around
planet uh the exosphere causes them to
spiral inwards and the closer they go
the more that gas is going to slow them
down gets more dense towards the center
and so they spiral inwards and
eventually will burn up as meteors in
the atmosphere of the main
planet. And in some cases, we've seen
some really odd situations that look
like fossilized ring systems. At the top
here, we have Pan, moon of Saturn, and
the lower picture is another moon,
Epotus.
And Pan is surrounded by this skirt
which seems to be a fossilized ring of
debris that has spiraled in under the
very weak gravity of Pan and lodged as
this sort of uh ring of material with
waves in it around the equatorial region
of this tiny moon. And in the case of
the Apatus, it has an equatorial ridge
going around it, which could well have
originated from fallout from a ring
system landing around the equator. It
looks like two halves of coconut joined
together. Uh, a Montipython reference
for you
there. But we're really talking about
the Earth. And what I want to do is go
back nearly half a billion years to the
Orivishian era 488 to 444 million years
ago just after the Cambrian explosion
where life really got going. A complex
life started to evolve and produce a
range of creatures in the ocean here
including the nautilus that you can see
there amongst
others. But right in the middle of that
Orivishian era, something bad happened.
465 million years ago, there was a
massive ice age. Global temperatures
took a nose dive. Ice advanced from the
poles to the equator. And as it did so,
it reflected more heat. That would
accelerate the advance. Sea levels were
being reduced as water was freezing out
onto the uh glacias on the land and
reducing water vapor in the atmosphere
reduces the greenhouse effect leading to
even more runaway cooling. So quite a
catastrophe. But just about at the same
time we also saw something in the fossil
record in the geology of the earth. this
cliff here about twothirds of the way up
you can see a quite dark line running
across the cliff face and
that is absolutely stuffed full of
asteroid dust and
meteors
meteorites these are sedimentary rocks
that were from the ocean floor that have
now been raised up by geological
processes in the intervening 460 million
years and are now exposed and we can
study them in great detail. And what we
find is this layer of these meteors
meteorites that came down into the ocean
presumably and settled out into the
sediment and it lasted for a very long
time.
When we look at the number of meteorite
strikes on earth, we can draw a graph of
the count and it seems to take this
exponential rise towards the present
day. But of course, that is massively
biased by the fact
that it's much easier to find recent
impacts than older ones. So you should
expect an exponential rise in the
probability of finding things. erosion
rubs them out. If they land in the sea,
eventually the plate tectonics takes the
uh seafloor down underneath and melts it
and so destroys the evidence. So, we
should certainly expect that. But in the
middle there, 4, six, six million years
ago, there is a massive spike, the
Orivishian impact spike, where the
number of impacts just skyrocketed.
And when we look in the fossil record in
the geological
lair in that cliff face and elsewhere in
the world, we find the fossils of dying
nautilus
creatures and lots and lots of
meteorites trapped in the same layer.
These are all the same type of
meteorite. They are
elondrites. 38% of all the meteors on
the earth are this type of object. and
radioisotope dates for this depending on
whether you use uranium lead or argon or
cosmic ray exposure other types of
tricks all come up with a figure around
about 467 million years ago plus or
minus a couple of million
years. There's also enormous signs that
the material of these meteorites has
been exposed to massive shock. And we're
not talking about the effect of falling
into the ocean and landing in the
sediment. That would not have been
violent enough to have created this
shock. This was formed when the parent
body of all these meteorites was
destroyed out in the asteroid belt,
creating a a million pieces, uh, some of
which then came our way and landed on
the Earth. And in attempting to trace
this back, we have a couple of asteroids
that are of interest. Asteroid Flora
orbiting out there beyond Mars is 136
kilometer asteroid sype made of
silicates with a certain amount of
nickel iron that matches the composition
of the
Londrites perfectly.
And it's a member, it's the largest
member in fact of a family of asteroids
called the flora family with 13,000
known fragments. There flora
itself is 80% of the mass of the family
but uh there are others like Ariadne at
9% Gaspara various other named asteroids
as well as many many more fragments and
of course millions more that were too
small for us to
see. And a second asteroid family named
Gayion is out in the asteroid belt
contains at least 2,500 known objects.
And although GeFon was the first to be
discovered, it's only 7 km across. Other
members of the group are up to 50
kilometers in diameter. So quite sizable
objects. And an asteroid family is
identified by plotting the orbital
radius. the semi- major axis. So you can
see the group labeled Flora in blue at
the left of the diagram at 2.3
astronomical units out beyond Mars there
and GFion a little bit further out at
around
2.8 in purple and we are plotting on the
horizontal axis that radius and the
vertical axis is the eccentricity of the
orbit how elliptical it is. And so if
you plot all the known objects, they
turn up in these groups. And these are
the shotgun blasts created when there
were giant impacts out in the asteroid
belt that shattered larger bodies and
blew all these fragments off into fairly
similar but gradually dispersing orbits.
Um and so we think that what happened
was that 470 million years ago there was
a massive collision out in the asteroid
belt possibly creating the flora or
gaffion families of asteroids and along
with it all the
elondrite bodies that then became
meteorites bombarding the earth in a
very great storm over a few million
years. The moon also has a lot of
elondrites on it showing that a lot of
the material came its way as well. And
there are major craters on the earth
that can be identified with this. In
Canada, we have the clear water lakes.
The east lake 26 kilometers
across flooded that's 465 million years
old and it's dated to the El Condrite
shower. The West Lake there a little bit
younger 286 million years is not
associated with it. Just happened to
have landed in the same spot
almost. And if we look for other craters
on Earth that also date back to this 465
466 millionyear period, we can plot the
locations of a number of known impact
sites. And they're marked as these
little red dots on the diagram here. And
a bunch of them uh landed on the
continent of Baltica, which is now the
Baltic States and Norway and
Scandinavia.
And you can see them marked there. And
they all date to round about that uh 460
millionyear period. One or two others
around um that are a little bit further
a drift that are younger. But it seems
that there was this storm of objects
from 470 to 430 million years with a
cluster around the 460 mark. All
impacting the Earth, all in a fairly
tight grouping. In fact, so this
definitely suggests some sort of common
origin, a shower of material coming down
on the
Earth. Now, it's possible that that was
a shower of material direct from the
asteroid belt, but it's also quite
likely that one of these objects or
several of them came on close approaches
to the Earth and were shredded into a
ring system around the Earth. They would
have approached closer than Earth's rash
limit and the gravity tidal tension
would have torn them apart rather as
Schumacvi 9 was and perhaps in this case
rather than simply then colliding with
the Earth directly they would have gone
into orbit around it and created a
magnificent ring system. But of course,
ring systems are temporary and they
would have rained down particles onto
the earth over that million-year period
or so uh creating havoc on the earth. So
perhaps at that time the earth would
have had a ring system.
All that debris coming in either
directly or via the rings would have
created a climate catastrophe for the
earth. All that dust and debris of
material falling into the atmosphere or
impacting the ground and throwing
material up would have blotted out the
sun. The temperature dropping and
leading to the ice age that we indeed
observed. But another effect that I
think is very interesting is that a ring
of material around the planet casts a
shadow on the planet as seen here with
Saturn's rings casting those amazing
bands shadows across the uh hemisphere
of Saturn. And of course, it's the
winter hemisphere, the one that's tilted
away from the sun that gets this shadow.
And so it would make any winters more
extreme if we had a ring system around
the
earth. To combine with
that, the major continent Gondana had
moved south south away from Lorentia and
Baltica and had arrived at the pole. And
as it crossed the pole, it provided the
perfect breeding ground for more ice.
And so ice at the pole could easily be
triggered. So I suspect that all of
these factors combined, the asteroid
impacts blocking the sun, the potential
ring system casting a shadow over the
winter hemisphere. And if that winter
was happening down over Gonduana, you
have the perfect storm for an ice age
beginning. The seas beginning to ice
over, more ice, more reflection, water
vapor pulled from the atmosphere, less
greenhouse effect, a runaway uh ice age.
And in fact, at the end of the
Orivishian era, we had the second
largest known extinction on Earth of 60
million, sorry, 60% of marine life dying
out. Now, this seems to have occurred in
multiple pulses. It may well have been
that the asteroid impact caused a first
pulse and the climate catastrophe that
followed another one. But there is
another possible explanation o of a
supernova going off near the earth. Now
I'll talk about that in another
video. But I just wanted to finish by
discussing a much much earlier
catastrophe in the life of the earth.
Right back at the beginning, just a
couple of hundred million years into the
life of the
Earth, a giant object which we now call
Thea collided with the Earth. This was
an object the size of Mars. So this was
an absolutely enormous impact. The two
main bodies merged together to give us
the Earth that we have today. and a lot
of it material was ejected out into the
region around um into
orbit. Now some of that material would
have been inside the rash limit and
would not be able to coalesce to form a
moon because of the tidal tension. It
would have been kept as small particles
and so it would have formed a ring
system and eventually of course that
ring would have rained out onto the
earth as these things are purely
temporary. But beyond the rash
limit, the particles could coalesce and
they would have perhaps formed into
lumps and then the larger lumps formed
from those growing into a series of
multiple moonlets and they would have
later merged together perhaps to form
our moon or indeed some of them may have
been catapulted into collisions with the
earth.
But I think this is extremely likely
because when we look at the surface of
the moon, we see a lot of giant ancient
impact basins on the surface of the
moon. And it seems likely that this was
the moon gobbling up some of its smaller
siblings along the way. But I don't know
whether there's any real evidence of
that. It's just a theory of mine.
What we also observe though
is co-orbital with the moon at the
lrangege points L4 and L5. So these are
points where the earth moon gravity and
the gravity of the sun balances out to
create a semi-stable regions where
material if it falls into these spots it
will orbit around the earth in a monthly
cycle and keep away from the moon while
it's doing so. And back in
1950s, Cordalooski predicted that there
would be clouds of materials in these
Trojan orbits around the Earth. Um, and
he attempted to photograph the objects.
And what he discovered was not any
particularly large objects, but some
clouds of material. So, not real rings,
but small patches of um icy bodies,
fragments, little tiny pieces orbiting
around the earth at L4 and
L5. And uh this has gradually been
confirmed by other people and the Royal
Astronomical Society published a
photograph at the bottom right there
which is taken in polarized light and
has L5 marked on it with a little d dot
there. That's the Lrangee point and
around it there is this cloud of
material. The couple of diagonal lines,
those are satellites photobombing the
image. Uh this is a common problem these
days with so many of artificial
satellites up there in orbit. And so it
seems likely that perhaps more than once
the Earth may have had temporary ring
systems. So I'll just leave you with
this artist's impression of the Earth.
Of course, that's the modern Earth with
the modern continents on it with a ring
system around it. Thanks very much for
listening.